setup.md, before:

# Setup Guide for STL Data API

This guide provides step-by-step instructions to set up the development environment for the STL Data API project. It is designed for junior developers with basic Python knowledge. Follow these steps to clone the repository, install dependencies, and configure the environment to start contributing.

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have the following installed on your system:

- **Python 3.13+**: Download from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads/) or use `pyenv` for version management.
  - Verify: `python --version` (should output 3.13 or higher).
- **Docker Desktop**: Install from [docker.com](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) (includes Docker Compose).
  - Verify: `docker --version` and `docker-compose --version`.
- **psql Client**: For PostgreSQL interaction.
  - Mac: `brew install postgresql`
  - Windows: Install via [PostgreSQL installer](https://www.postgresql.org/download/windows/) or WSL.
  - Linux: `sudo apt-get install postgresql-client`
  - Verify: `psql --version`.
- **Git**: For repository cloning.
  - Verify: `git --version`.
- **VS Code**: Recommended IDE with extensions:
  - Python (by Microsoft)
  - Docker (by Microsoft)
  - GitLens (optional for Git integration)
  - Install: [code.visualstudio.com](https://code.visualstudio.com/).

## Step-by-Step Setup

### 1. Clone the Repository

Clone the project repository to your local machine and navigate to the project directory.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/oss-slu/stl_metro_dat_api
cd stl_metro_dat_api
```

- Ensure you have write access to the repository (contact the Tech Lead if issues arise).
- The repository contains the initial structure, including `src/`, `docker/`, `tests/`, and more (see README.md).

### 2. Set Up Python Virtual Environment

Create and activate a virtual environment to isolate project dependencies.

```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```

- Verify activation: Your terminal prompt should show `(venv)`.
- To deactivate later: Run `deactivate`.

### 3. Install Python Dependencies

Install the required Python libraries listed in `requirements.txt`.

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

- Key dependencies include:
  - `flask` and `flask-restful`: For API microservices.
  - `kafka-python`: For Kafka integration.
  - `psycopg2-binary`: For PostgreSQL connectivity.
  - `pandas`, `requests`, `beautifulsoup4`, `PyPDF2`, `openpyxl`: For data ingestion/processing.
  - `sqlalchemy`: For PostgreSQL ORM.
  - `flask-swagger-ui`: For Open API documentation.
  - `pytest`: For testing.
- Verify: `pip list` should show installed packages (e.g., `flask==3.0.0`).

### 4. Configure Environment Variables

Copy the provided `.env.example` file to `.env` and update it with local settings.

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit `.env` with a text editor (e.g., VS Code). Example content:

```env
KAFKA_BROKER=localhost:9092
PG_HOST=localhost
PG_PORT=5433
PG_DB=stl_data
PG_USER=postgres
PG_PASSWORD=example_pass
```

- **Note**: Use a secure `PG_PASSWORD` for local development. Do not commit `.env` to Git (it’s ignored via `.gitignore`).
- These variables configure connections to Kafka and PostgreSQL containers.

### 5. Setup PostgreSQL Server

Register a new server in PostgreSQL pgAdmin 4 with port number 5433

- Name: Docker STL API
- Host name/address: localhost
- Port: 5433
- Maintenance database: stl_data
- Username: postgres

### 6. Start Docker Containers

Use Docker Compose to spin up Kafka (with Zookeeper) and PostgreSQL containers.

```bash
docker-compose --env-file.env -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d
```

- Verify containers are running: `docker ps` (should list `zookeeper`, `kafka`, and `postgres`).
- To stop: `docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml down`.
  - If not initialized correctly, remove volumes when taking down containers: `docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml down -v`
- If issues occur (e.g., port conflicts), check logs: `docker logs <container_name>`.

### 7. Verify Connectivity

Run the connectivity test script to ensure Kafka and PostgreSQL are accessible.

```bash
python tests/basic_test.py
```

- This script tests:
  - Producing/consuming a sample message to Kafka.
  - Connecting to PostgreSQL and executing a sample query.
- If errors occur, check `.env` settings, ensure Docker containers are running, or consult the Tech Lead.

### 8. Run a Sample Microservice

Test the Flask skeleton for the write-side microservice.

```bash
cd src/write_service
python app.py
```

- Open a browser or use `curl`: `curl http://localhost:5000/health`.
- Expected output: `{"status": "ok"}`.
- Stop the server: `Ctrl+C`.

Test the Flask skeleton for the read-side microservice.

```bash
cd src/read_service
python app.py
```

- Open a browser or use `curl`: `curl http://localhost:5001/swagger`.
- Expected output: Swagger opened in browser.
- Stop the server: `Ctrl+C`.

### 9. Run Tests

Execute the test suite to ensure the environment is correctly set up.

```bash
pytest tests/
```

- This runs unit tests in the `tests/` directory.
- Expected: All tests pass (initially, only connectivity tests exist).
- If tests fail, check error messages and ensure Docker services are up.

## Development Workflow

- **Branching**: Create feature branches from `develop` (e.g., `git checkout develop && git checkout -b feature/sprint1-dev1-kafka-setup`).
- **Coding**: Write code in `src/`, tests in `tests/`, and configs in `config/` or `docker/`. Include docstrings and tests in your code.
- **Commits**: Use clear messages (e.g., `git commit -m "Add Kafka consumer for web data"`).
- **Pull Requests**: Push your branch (`git push origin feature/your-branch`) and create a PR to `develop`. Assign a reviewer.
- **Kanban Board**: Check GitHub Projects for assigned issues and sprint tasks.

Commit message:

Major changes and fixes to write service

setup.md, after:

# Setup Guide for STL Data API

This guide provides step-by-step instructions to set up the development environment for the STL Data API project. It is designed for junior developers with basic Python knowledge. Follow these steps to clone the repository, install dependencies, and configure the environment to start contributing.

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have the following installed on your system:

- **Python 3.13+**: Download from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads/) or use `pyenv` for version management.
  - Verify: `python --version` (should output 3.13 or higher).
- **Docker Desktop**: Install from [docker.com](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) (includes Docker Compose).
  - Verify: `docker --version` and `docker-compose --version`.
- **psql Client**: For PostgreSQL interaction.
  - Mac: `brew install postgresql`
  - Windows: Install via [PostgreSQL installer](https://www.postgresql.org/download/windows/) or WSL.
  - Linux: `sudo apt-get install postgresql-client`
  - Verify: `psql --version`.
- **Git**: For repository cloning.
  - Verify: `git --version`.
- **VS Code**: Recommended IDE with extensions:
  - Python (by Microsoft)
  - Docker (by Microsoft)
  - GitLens (optional for Git integration)
  - Install: [code.visualstudio.com](https://code.visualstudio.com/).

## Step-by-Step Setup

### 1. Clone the Repository

Clone the project repository to your local machine and navigate to the project directory.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/oss-slu/stl_metro_dat_api
cd stl_metro_dat_api
```

- Ensure you have write access to the repository (contact the Tech Lead if issues arise).
- The repository contains the initial structure, including `src/`, `docker/`, `tests/`, and more (see README.md).

### 2. Set Up Python Virtual Environment

Create and activate a virtual environment to isolate project dependencies.

```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```

- Verify activation: Your terminal prompt should show `(venv)`.
- To deactivate later: Run `deactivate`.

### 3. Install Python Dependencies

Install the required Python libraries listed in `requirements.txt`.

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

- Key dependencies include:
  - `flask` and `flask-restful`: For API microservices.
  - `kafka-python`: For Kafka integration.
  - `psycopg2-binary`: For PostgreSQL connectivity.
  - `pandas`, `requests`, `beautifulsoup4`, `PyPDF2`, `openpyxl`: For data ingestion/processing.
  - `sqlalchemy`: For PostgreSQL ORM.
  - `flask-swagger-ui`: For Open API documentation.
  - `pytest`: For testing.
- Verify: `pip list` should show installed packages (e.g., `flask==3.0.0`).

### 4. Configure Environment Variables

Copy the provided `.env.example` file to `.env` and update it with local settings.

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit `.env` with a text editor (e.g., VS Code). Example content:

```env
KAFKA_BROKER=localhost:9092
PG_HOST=localhost
PG_PORT=5433
PG_DB=stl_data
PG_USER=postgres
PG_PASSWORD=example_pass
```

- **Note**: Use a secure `PG_PASSWORD` for local development. Do not commit `.env` to Git (it’s ignored via `.gitignore`).
- These variables configure connections to Kafka and PostgreSQL containers.

### 5. Setup PostgreSQL Server

Register a new server in PostgreSQL pgAdmin 4 with port number 5433

- Name: Docker STL API
- Host name/address: localhost
- Port: 5433
- Maintenance database: stl_data
- Username: postgres

### 6. Start Docker Containers

Use Docker Compose to spin up Kafka (with Zookeeper) and PostgreSQL containers.

```bash
docker-compose --env-file.env -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d
```

- Verify containers are running: `docker ps` (should list `zookeeper`, `kafka`, and `postgres`).
- **Important!** If you make changes to your code, you must update your Docker Containers so Docker can get the newest version of your code. To do this, run: `docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml build`
- To stop: `docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml down`.
  - If not initialized correctly, remove volumes when taking down containers: `docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml down -v`
- If issues occur (e.g., port conflicts), check logs: `docker logs <container_name>`.

### 7. Verify Connectivity

Run the connectivity test script to ensure Kafka and PostgreSQL are accessible.

```bash
python tests/basic_test.py
```

- This script tests:
  - Producing/consuming a sample message to Kafka.
  - Connecting to PostgreSQL and executing a sample query.
- If errors occur, check `.env` settings, ensure Docker containers are running, or consult the Tech Lead.

### 8. Run a Sample Microservice

Test the Flask skeleton for the write-side microservice.

- The write-service app should start automatically with Docker. To run the write-side app without Docker, go to the project's root directory in your terminal, and run `python -m src.write_service.app`.
- Open a browser and go to `http://localhost:5000/`. A webpage should appear.
- Stop the server: `Ctrl+C`.

Test the Flask skeleton for the read-side microservice.

```bash
cd src/read_service
python app.py
```

- Open a browser or use `curl`: `curl http://localhost:5001/swagger`.
- Expected output: Swagger opened in browser.
- Stop the server: `Ctrl+C`.

### 9. Run Tests

Execute the test suite to ensure the environment is correctly set up.

```bash
pytest tests/
```

- This runs unit tests in the `tests/` directory.
- Expected: All tests pass (initially, only connectivity tests exist).
- If tests fail, check error messages and ensure Docker services are up.

## Development Workflow

- **Branching**: Create feature branches from `develop` (e.g., `git checkout develop && git checkout -b feature/sprint1-dev1-kafka-setup`).
- **Coding**: Write code in `src/`, tests in `tests/`, and configs in `config/` or `docker/`. Include docstrings and tests in your code.
- **Commits**: Use clear messages (e.g., `git commit -m "Add Kafka consumer for web data"`).
- **Pull Requests**: Push your branch (`git push origin feature/your-branch`) and create a PR to `develop`. Assign a reviewer.
- **Kanban Board**: Check GitHub Projects for assigned issues and sprint tasks.
